Module #9 Visualization in R
I have chosen the “mtcars” dataset, which is available in the list of datasets from Vincent Arel Bundock. It’s a classic dataset from the 1970s, containing various car attributes such as miles per gallon (mpg), number of cylinders, horsepower, and weight.

I will generate three different types of visualizations:

Basic Visualization (Base R Plot)

Lattice Plot

ggplot2 Plot

Basic Visualization (Base R Plot)

I will start with a basic scatter plot using the base R plotting system. We’ll plot mpg (miles per gallon) against wt (weight of the car).

data(mtcars)
plot(mtcars$wt, mtcars$mpg,
main = "MPG vs Weight",
xlab = "Weight", ylab = "MPG",
pch = 19, col = "blue")

Lattice Plot

Lattice is a powerful package that provides a high-level function for creating complex multi-variable plots. I will use a xyplot to create a scatter plot of mpg against wt with a panel grouping by the number of cylinders.

library(lattice)
xyplot(mpg ~ wt | factor(cyl), data = mtcars,
main = "MPG vs Weight by Cylinder",
xlab = "Weight", ylab = "MPG")

ggplot2 Plot

Finally, using ggplot2, I will create a scatter plot of mpg versus wt and enhance it with additional elements like color to represent the number of cylinders.

library(ggplot2)
ggplot(mtcars, aes(x = wt, y = mpg, color = factor(cyl))) +
geom_point() +
labs(title = "MPG vs Weight with Cylinders",
x = "Weight", y = "MPG", color = "Cylinders") +
theme_minimal()

Basic Plot (Base R Plot)
The base R plot is straightforward and easy to implement, making it great for quick exploratory analysis. It’s a no-frills visualization that works well for simple plots like scatter plots, histograms, and line graphs. However, it can be limited when you want more customization and additional features. For example, it’s harder to add themes, legends, and custom labels compared to other libraries.

Lattice Plot
The lattice plot is more powerful for handling multi-variable data and creating conditioned plots. It’s particularly useful when you want to break down the data by a factor or a grouping variable (like cylinders in this case). The panels allow for a more detailed exploration of the relationship between variables for each group. However, the customization options are somewhat limited compared to ggplot2, and the visual appeal isn’t as high.

ggplot2 Plot
ggplot2 is arguably the most versatile and visually appealing of the three. It is based on the Grammar of Graphics, which allows for easy layering of different visual elements like points, lines, and themes. The color coding for cylinders makes it easy to interpret, and the plot has a clean aesthetic with minimal effort. ggplot2 is widely used in the R community for its flexibility and rich options for customizing visualizations, making it ideal for more polished outputs, especially for presentations or publications.

Each of these visualization methods has its strengths. Base R plots are great for quick, simple visualizations. Lattice is excellent for multi-panel plots and conditioned visualizations. Ggplot2 provides the most flexibility, customization, and aesthetic value. Which method you choose depends on the complexity of the data and your needs. For quick exploratory analysis, base R or lattice might be sufficient, but for more polished, presentation-ready plots, ggplot2 is often the best option.
